README.md, before:

# Read Me

## Problem
Write a Java program that reads a collection of files and prints the top N words ordered by their occurrences across all files.
### Input
Reads the following from command line arguments:
- An integer specifying the value of N.
- A list of paths that represent the directories and/or files to traverse. Both directories as well as files can be provided simultaneously.
- A small collection of files exists here which can be used to test the program.
#### Input errors
At minimum, the program must print a descriptive usage upon receiving the wrong number of parameters or badly formatted parameters.
#### Output
The program prints the N words that have the most occurrences in descending occurrence order in the following format:
- <word 1> occurred <x> times
- <word 2> occurred <y> times
#### Deliverable
Please provide the code, with any testing examples you run. The submitted code will be assumed to be a representation of what you consider to be production ready.
### Requirements
#### Functional
- If a specified path is a directory, that directory should be scanned for files, and subdirectories are also scanned recursively.
- Words are separated with whitespace characters. Other characters cannot be considered as delimiters. "re-design" is a single word, not two.
- Punctuation is not included in a word, and word comparison is case insensitive. These words are the same: “Bank!”, “BANK”, “bank”, “baNk”.
- When two words share the same count, they are sub-sorted in alphabetical order, ignoring case.
#### Performance
The program should be able to produce the result quickly, even when faced with many files of varying sizes across many directories.
#### Assumptions
- All files are valid UTF-8 text files, and could be of widely varying sizes.
- Systems upon which this program will run will have a minimum of 8 CPU cores
- All other assumptions made should be documented with your reasoning.

## Solution

### General Notes and Possible Enhancements

- Testing covers the use cases above. Tests also verify that the counts are correct for all the words in a file.  More tests could be added to increase code coverage.
  - The program is provided with multiple directories containing text files. It should recursively traverse each directory and count words across all files.
  - Two versions of the bible text are included
  - All original files are include
  - Unit test use all the sample files
- WordCounter class was built as interface to handle different methods of counting
  - HashMapCounter - Does an in memory version of determining the topwords.  I found that this method was fast and efficient and uses little memory.  I was setup on my home machine, community version of IntelliJ, using some performance tools would be more ideal I used times and OS memoery tools to monitor.
    - Took only 373ms to process a bible sized file
    - Running 10x the similar files at the same time only takes about three as long and memory impact was not noticed
  - PostgresCounter - After doing the in memory version, was hesitant to implement this at all but wanted to compare.  Did this in part because I discussed it on the call.  Was much slower and requires an external Postgres database for this test
    - Took 266,368ms (4.4 min) to process a bible sized file, note this was using docker and 10 cores but I did not optimize. If multiple nodes were used and a lot more data this could help.  I might be better to onlyu update once per file instead of on every word.
    - The sorting does not occur in the DB but could, however the loading alone seems to be a huge bottleneck right now and should be addressed first (if at all)
- Error handling could provide more detailed errors and messages when errors occur

#### A Note on testing
- Some testing compares files using grep, you can count words in single files using commands like (checking the file 'kjv.txt' in this example) to get data and compare:
  > sed 's/[^a-zA-Z ]//g' kjv.txt | grep -oE '\\b[a-zA-Z]+\\b' | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]' | sort | uniq -c | sort -nr

#### Assumption: Word Counting Method
- Reasoning: The solution assumes that hyphenated words, such as "re-design", should be counted as a single word rather than separate words. I'm assuming that words like design and re-design are actually counted the same
- Justification: While the instructions point this case out as a single word, they do not state how hyphenated words should be counted, treating them as single words simplifies the counting process and aligns with common text processing conventions.

## Setup notes:

- Step 1: Install Java Development Kit (JDK) version 17 or later. You can download JDK from the official Oracle website or use a package manager like Homebrew on macOS or apt-get on Ubuntu.
- Step 2: Install Apache Maven by downloading the binary archive from the Apache Maven website and extracting it to a desired location.
- Step 3: Set up environment variables JAVA_HOME and MAVEN_HOME to point to the installation directories of JDK and Maven, respectively.
- Step 4: PostgresSQL (optional)
  - To use postgres, you need to enable and update DB configuration in the application.properties
    - by default useDatabase flag is false (It will use the in memory solution otherwise)
  - Make sure postgres is running at the location specified in application.properties

### To run

- Several easy ways to run:
    - Run the main class using maven and specify arguments
      - To run with spring:
        > mvn install exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="will.peterson.topwords.MainSpring" -Dexec.args="3 src/main/resources/test-files-2/sample.txt" -DskipTests
      - To run without spring:
        > mvn install exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="will.peterson.topwords.MainNoSpring" -Dexec.args="3 src/main/resources/test-files-2/sample.txt" -DskipTests
      - Or, run unit tests under test class 'MainNoSpring' class
        - Some tests don't have asserts, and point to local files to simulate running the program
        - Some tests include asserts to test the output
      - Command is:
        > mvn test -Dtest=will.peterson.topwords.MainNoSpringTest
    - Run unit tests under test class 'WordCountExecutorTest'
      - Command is (also shown with specific test specified):
        > mvn test -Dtest=will.peterson.topwords.counter.WordCountExecutorTest
        > 
        > mvn test -Dtest=will.peterson.topwords.counter.WordCountExecutorTest#fetchSortedWordsTest__kjv_grepCompare

  #### Sample output
        > mvn install exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="will.peterson.topwords.MainNoSpring" -Dexec.args="3 src/main/resources/test-files-2/kjv.txt" -DskipTests
        >
        > ...counting words for file kjv.txt
        > 
        > the occurred 64016 times
        >
        > and occurred 51709 times
        > 
        > of occurred 34865 times
        > 
        > (Elapsed Time: 508 milliseconds)

Commit message:

updates and bug fixes, command line args, validating args with central function, regular expression numbers filtering, test for numbers, using faster collections, updating sql counter, move delete tables logic, move methods to private including shutdown, added spring profiles for better config, yaml config, other fixe as well

README.md, after:

# Read Me

## Problem
Write a Java program that reads a collection of files and prints the top N words ordered by their occurrences across all files.
### Input
Reads the following from command line arguments:
- An integer specifying the value of N.
- A list of paths that represent the directories and/or files to traverse. Both directories as well as files can be provided simultaneously.
- A small collection of files exists here which can be used to test the program.
#### Input errors
At minimum, the program must print a descriptive usage upon receiving the wrong number of parameters or badly formatted parameters.
#### Output
The program prints the N words that have the most occurrences in descending occurrence order in the following format:
- <word 1> occurred <x> times
- <word 2> occurred <y> times
#### Deliverable
Please provide the code, with any testing examples you run. The submitted code will be assumed to be a representation of what you consider to be production ready.
### Requirements
#### Functional
- If a specified path is a directory, that directory should be scanned for files, and subdirectories are also scanned recursively.
- Words are separated with whitespace characters. Other characters cannot be considered as delimiters. "re-design" is a single word, not two.
- Punctuation is not included in a word, and word comparison is case insensitive. These words are the same: “Bank!”, “BANK”, “bank”, “baNk”.
- When two words share the same count, they are sub-sorted in alphabetical order, ignoring case.
#### Performance
The program should be able to produce the result quickly, even when faced with many files of varying sizes across many directories.
#### Assumptions
- All files are valid UTF-8 text files, and could be of widely varying sizes.
- Systems upon which this program will run will have a minimum of 8 CPU cores
- All other assumptions made should be documented with your reasoning.

## Solution

### General Notes and Possible Enhancements

- Testing covers the use cases above. Tests also verify that the counts are correct for all the words in a file.  More tests could be added to increase code coverage.
  - The program is provided with multiple directories containing text files. It should recursively traverse each directory and count words across all files.
  - Two versions of the bible text are included
  - All original files are include
  - Unit test use all the sample files
- WordCounter class was built as interface to handle different methods of counting
  - HashMapCounter - Does an in memory version of determining the topwords.  I found that this method was fast and efficient and uses little memory.  I was setup on my home machine, community version of IntelliJ, using some performance tools would be more ideal I used times and OS memoery tools to monitor.
    - Took only 373ms to process a bible sized file
    - Running 10x the similar files at the same time only takes about three as long and memory impact was not noticed
  - PostgresCounter - After doing the in memory version, was hesitant to implement this at all but wanted to compare.  Did this in part because I discussed it on the call.  Was much slower and requires an external Postgres database for this test
    - Took 266,368ms (4.4 min) to process a bible sized file, note this was using docker and 10 cores but I did not optimize. If multiple nodes were used and a lot more data this could help.  I might be better to onlyu update once per file instead of on every word.
    - The sorting does not occur in the DB but could, however the loading alone seems to be a huge bottleneck right now and should be addressed first (if at all)
- Error handling could provide more detailed errors and messages when errors occur

#### A Note on testing
- Some testing compares files using grep, you can count words in single files using commands like (checking the file 'kjv.txt' in this example) to get data and compare:
  > sed 's/[^a-zA-Z ]//g' kjv.txt | grep -oE '\\b[a-zA-Z]+\\b' | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]' | sort | uniq -c | sort -nr

#### Assumption: Word Counting Method
- Reasoning: The solution assumes that hyphenated words, such as "re-design", should be counted as a single word rather than separate words. I'm assuming that words like design and re-design are actually counted the same
- Justification: While the instructions point this case out as a single word, they do not state how hyphenated words should be counted, treating them as single words simplifies the counting process and aligns with common text processing conventions.

## Setup notes:

- Step 1: Install Java Development Kit (JDK) version 17 or later. You can download JDK from the official Oracle website or use a package manager like Homebrew on macOS or apt-get on Ubuntu.
- Step 2: Install Apache Maven by downloading the binary archive from the Apache Maven website and extracting it to a desired location.
- Step 3: Set up environment variables JAVA_HOME and MAVEN_HOME to point to the installation directories of JDK and Maven, respectively.
- Step 4: PostgresSQL (optional)
  - To use sql, you need to enable and update DB configuration in the application.properties
    - by default the profile is set to 'hash', you can also use 'grep' and 'sql' settings.  Note that these others are for experimental use only. They will not perform as well and will more likely have bugs
  - Make sure postgres is running at the location specified in application.properties

### To run

- Several easy ways to run:
    - Run the main class using maven and specify arguments
      - To run with spring:
        > mvn install exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="will.peterson.topwords.MainSpring" -Dexec.args="3 src/main/resources/test-files-2/sample.txt" -DskipTests
      - To run without spring:
        > mvn install exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="will.peterson.topwords.MainNoSpring" -Dexec.args="3 src/main/resources/test-files-2/sample.txt" -DskipTests
      - Or, run unit tests under test class 'MainNoSpring' class
        - Some tests don't have asserts, and point to local files to simulate running the program
        - Some tests include asserts to test the output
      - Command is:
        > mvn test -Dtest=will.peterson.topwords.MainNoSpringTest
    - Run unit tests under test class 'WordCountExecutorTest'
      - Command is (also shown with specific test specified):
        > mvn test -Dtest=will.peterson.topwords.counter.WordCountExecutorTest
        > 
        > mvn test -Dtest=will.peterson.topwords.counter.WordCountExecutorTest#fetchSortedWordsTest__kjv_grepCompare

  #### Sample output
        > mvn install exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="will.peterson.topwords.MainNoSpring" -Dexec.args="3 src/main/resources/test-files-2/kjv.txt" -DskipTests
        >
        > ...counting words for file kjv.txt
        > 
        > the occurred 64016 times
        >
        > and occurred 51709 times
        > 
        > of occurred 34865 times
        > 
        > (Elapsed Time: 508 milliseconds)
